&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; So now that we have covered all the relevant tools, lets talk more about what I had to do in order to get this project done. All in all, I would say that I have spent 12 hours, working on this project. I would say that 70% of my time was spent writing the content for this essay, and another 20% was spent referring back to lab resources for clarification on certain topics (I spent the most time trying to understand and learn how to use **Makefiles**). The last 10% of the project was spent on applying the tools I used. For example, I put in a decent amount of time setting up my **Github** repository and syncing it to **Git**.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Surprisingly enough, aside from one **Github** article with regards to setting up an SSH key, the resources I used were just limited to the resources that Professor Sanchez provided. I didn't feel the need to look to other resources like [Stackoverflow](Stackoverflow.com) or [Quora](Quora.com). I also didn't find it helpful to reach out to classmates for help or clarification because I felt that online resources were more than sufficient. I did, however, ask Sindhuja for some help using these tools. For instance, in lab, she taught the me how I can push my files from my local repository to **Github**.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; To conclude, I'm just going to talk about aspects of the project that I really liked. First of all, by having me write extensively about the tools that I've learned in this class, this project really forced me to reference labs and articles in order to really clarify my understanding of these tools. In short, one's understanding of tools and concepts really increases when one has to explain them. In addition, I also really appreciated how this project forced us to apply some of these tools that we've learned. For instance, I had to push my project to the **Github** repository, write a **Makefile**, and write this whole essay in **Markdown**. Thanks to this project, I not only have experience using these tools, but I also now have an essay I can reference back to in case I need help with these tools in the future. 